How Not to Be a Snowplow Parent
The college bribery scandal raises the concern that overprotected young children are ill-equipped to face challenges. Here’s advice for raising a self-sufficient child.

Credit
KJ Dell'Antonia


Image
CreditCreditKJ Dell'Antonia
By Rachel Simmons
March 19, 2019

123
Leer en español
Many of us watched the college bribery scandal unfold last week as a kind of nationally televised master class in how not to parent a teenager. But even many well-intentioned parents fall into some of the same patterns as the wealthy parents charged in the case: removing obstacles to ensure that their children don’t have to deal with frustrations or failures, in a style known as snowplow parenting.

The trouble is that learning to handle failure is healthy for kids, and helps them grow into competent young adults. If you shield them from every problem now, they’ll be ill-equipped to face bigger challenges down the road.

Here are some ways to help raise a self-sufficient child.

Empathize, Don’t Advise
When your child has a problem — say, an unkind friend — resist the urge to dole out advice. Take a moment instead to name and respect your child’s feelings. Responses like “It sounds like you’re really angry, and I can see why” give your children confidence in their version of events. When kids have faith that their feelings matter, they have the raw material they need to advocate for themselves and solve their own problems.

In infancy, our children make wordless sounds, and we parents tend to babble right back. In this exchange, Dr. Daniel Siegel and Mary Hartzell write in “Parenting From the Inside Out,” a dialogue is begun which says to the baby, “I see you and I’m listening to you, and I’ll give back to you a reflection of yourself that is valued so you can see and value yourself, too. I like you just the way you are.”

ADVERTISEMENT


As children grow, those whose parents take their feelings seriously and reflect them back will feel justified in acting on them.

Ask What They Want to Do
After you empathize, ask your child, “What do you want to do about this?” It’s not unusual for a child to answer, “I don’t know!” Don’t give up.

You have 2 free articles remaining.
SUBSCRIBE TO THE TIMES
Once your child lands on at least one idea — “I could tell a teacher?” — work on imagining what might happen after that. In this exchange, you can encourage him or her to brainstorm multiple strategies and outcomes for a problem. A jolt of confidence kicks in.

This is the core of resilience: the ability to generate options in the face of a stressful challenge, anticipate consequences before we face them, and make the most practical, efficient choice.

You know you’ve mastered this maneuver when, each time your children approach you with a problem, they say, “I know, I know, what do I want to do about it?” What if your child wants to do nothing? That’s O.K., sometimes “nothing” is a strategy, too.

Editors’ Picks

‘Dog Suicide Bridge’: Why Do So Many Pets Keep Leaping Into a Scottish Gorge?

Gucci Makes a Shoe and Keen Gets the Last Laugh

At 71, She’s Never Felt Pain or Anxiety. Now Scientists Know Why.

ADVERTISEMENT


Put Your Help-a-Holic in Detox
If your children are constantly asking for help, teach them what productive support seeking looks like by refusing to indulge their every request. When they want help, ask yourself: Are they capable of figuring this out on their own? Will my help support learning and growth? What lessons might struggling teach? Can I identify one small step they can take on their own that will be stressful but not overwhelming?

If your child tends to suffer in silence, consider whether you’ve modeled similar bootstrapping behavior. Try being more transparent about your own vulnerability or times when you have asked a friend or a colleague for something. Let your children know that asking for help when you need it is an act of self-respect.

Make Them the Deciders: Cultivate Judgment
When your children ask if they have done a household chore correctly, respond with another question. Ask: “What do you think? Is the bed made properly? Does the dog’s water dish look clean to you? Is the floor clean enough?”

This question cultivates judgment, or authority in decision-making. When your child grows up, she will regularly face situations where she will have to take a stand and decide for herself (“Is this the best essay I can write? Is this party safe for me?”). Practice in using her judgment muscle early on will prepare her to weigh in on the bigger decisions down the road.

Check Yourself Before You Wreck Yourself
From the moment they are born, our kids study our faces for signs that the world is safe or scary. When they learn to walk, teetering and tumbling to the ground, the first thing they do is look up at us. If we gasp or panic, they do, too. If we react with a mix of empathy and encouragement, they keep going.

Our children never stop scanning our faces for direction on how upset to get, whether they’re bringing home a bad grade or facing a college rejection. That’s why I coach parents to ask themselves a single question when they are faced with an upset child and feel anxiety begin to tighten its grip: How would I parent if I were not afraid? That is, if you knew that despite whatever was happening with your children, they would turn out just fine, what would you say and do differently in this moment?

The question lets us pull back from the catastrophic thinking that often makes us say and do things we later regret, and makes room for openness and optimism. Once we are calm, we can stay in the moment with our children instead of being hijacked by our own fear.

Sign Up for Parenting
From the team at NYT Parenting (launching soon!): Get the latest news and guidance for parents. We'll celebrate the little parenting moments that mean a lot—and share stories that matter to families.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT


Instead of worrying so much about setting our children up to succeed, what if we spent at least as much time setting them up to fail? The lesson of the college admission scandal is not only to stop shielding our kids from every challenge. It’s that in attempting to protect them from any harm, we may turn out to be the ones harming them most of all.

Rachel Simmons is co-founder of Girls Leadership and the author of “Enough As She Is: How to Help Girls Move Past Impossible Standards of Success to Live Healthy, Happy, and Fulfilling Lives.”

My daughters saw me go back to school when they were in grade school.  They saw me pack my books and go to our nearby hospital where I studied in the hospital library.  They saw me not be able to go to weekend family get togethers sometimes because I had schoolwork to do.  They saw me differentiating what needed to be to be inclusive of family life importance but also educational importance.  They saw me stand up and give the student speech at my graduation.  

But......they also realized that getting my education was a means for our family to finally take a real family vacation to Disneyworld, buy a new vehicle for the first time, move to a bigger, but not fancy house.  And they saw that my income would help them get their future education, too.  

Now, my daughters are moms and wives, hard working responsible employees, and passionate community citizens.  There were no favors, no monetary buy offs in their early days or ever.  I would be aghast and mortified if they ever participated in such activity in their futures.  

Not only have the nation’s cheaters been immoral, they’ve led their children astray.  Along with my daughters learning that hard work and balancing life is what counts and by the way, works best, they are relaying that lifestyle to my grandkids.  After all, most times example can be the best lesson.

Reply8 RecommendShareFlag
Sati commented March 24
S
Sati
NYCMarch 24
Children need to learn the relationship between responsibility and freedom.  I find parents today go overboard with freedom and venture timidly, if at all, into the realm of responsibility.  Over the years of raising my own children and having many kids of all ages over to my house, I have been stunned by the lack of training and education in responsibility when it comes to simple table manners, household chores, communicating with adults, respecting the ways of the home.  Many kids show up clearly with no clue how to manage without mommy or daddy there to do it all for them.  I scratch my head wondering what these parents are thinking...are they planning to have their children live with them forever?

Reply6 RecommendShareFlag
Patricia Gonzalez commented March 24
P
Patricia Gonzalez
Costa RicaMarch 24
Excellent advice every parent should follow! My 9 year old daughter brings me my water without me asking and place it on a pretty coaster next to me when I sit  to watch some TV. She always gets me things when I ask  her with a good attitude and promptly. Just last week, she made dinner (something simple) for the first time for us her parents, and started making me salads. She gets excellent grades, she is very kind and works hard at school. Some people have told me that I am very lucky she is the way she is.Yet, because she is an only child and has more toys than some of her classmates, and I try to always treat her kindly and with respect, other people think she is spoiled. No: she is not the way she is out of luck: we discipline her when needed. Neither is she spoiled: we just give her a lot of love and assurance that she is just fine the way she is. I also daily, since she was a baby, spend quality time with her, listening to her and trying to follow most of the advice in this article, from validating her feelings to guiding her to find her own solutions. It is daily work and sometimes very difficult, but as my husband and I were eating the dinner she made for us with so much love, everything was worth it.

Reply9 RecommendShareFlag
john commented March 24
J
john
Toronto, OntarioMarch 24
The presumption, without evidence, is that all that snowplowing for rich kids is counterproductive.   
I suspect all that money spent on rich kids is not totally going to waste.

Reply5 RecommendShareFlag
Jean Lawless commented March 24
J
Jean Lawless
New JerseyMarch 24
When my parents and I were visiting one of my cousins,  she told the story about when she was 16 she had a job in midtown Manhattan and at lunch break she would go to mass at St. Patrick’s cathedral.  One day she saw her grandfather there and thought,  ‘what a coincidence.’  My mother,  her aunt replied, ‘What makes you think he wasn’t keeping an eye on you?’.  She was 16 in 1954.

Reply3 RecommendShareFlag
Meena commented March 24
M
Meena
CaMarch 24
The biggest reason some parents turn into snowplows and wade into illegal short cuts to push their children into a certain college or profession is because they have a chip on their shoulders. Perhaps they did not do as well academically and now wish to garner praise for themselves through their children. If they did well, then perhaps they measured themselves as they were reflected in other peoples eyes, never stopping to actually consider their self worth. Their children would be pushed through the same parental path, for blinded, they know no other. 

We as a hyper marketed society need to change. Stop rating colleges. Encourage kids to go to college locally and then later spread their wings to reach out to universities that specialize. This will be economical for families and allow kids to grow slowly and more confidently. And what a boost to local economies and teachers. And slowly perhaps, people will all have a similar common school of origin and the need to brag will drop. As will the financials of coveted private institutions. It will be thrilling to see them fight for good students for a change. And snowplows....why they will only be used to move cold, snow.

Reply4 RecommendShareFlag
Concerned! commented March 23
C
Concerned!
Costa MesaMarch 23
My 19 year old is 1900 miles away in the Army.  The only helicoptering he is getting is in an actual helicopter.  That being said, I still wonder if I do too much for him.  I have made a deal with him to subsidize his expenses; phone, car insurance, travel, if he saves his pay.  I always want him to know he has a safety net, both emotional and practical.  I think I want this for him because I never did.  I hope have have found a balance of support and independence.

Reply7 RecommendShareFlag
1 REPLY
Mo commented March 24
M
Mo
CaliforniaMarch 24
@Concerned! Whatever works as an incentive to get him on track to managing his own finances. Although, if he's an unmarried person in the Army, even as an E1 he has all his basics taken care of. He doesn't really need you to subsidize his expenses, and the Army has financial management training classes that he can take to learn about spending, saving, and investment for later use.

Reply6 RecommendShareFlag
Arch Davis commented March 23
A
Arch Davis
Princeton, NJMarch 23
Sometimes I would say, “Grandma can you do such and such for me?” And sometimes she would reply, “You are big enough and ugly enough to do it yourself.” She was very feminine and a radical feminist also.

Reply2 RecommendShareFlag
Hoyt Andres commented March 22
Hoyt Andres
Hoyt Andres
Highlands, NCMarch 22
This is a rehash of Parent Effectiveness Training which was popular in the 60's and 70's.  "Active Listening" is reflecting back on what you child says, rather than trying to solve their problem for them.

I'm glad these truths that we learned as young parents are still being used today!

Reply9 RecommendShareFlag
Josiah commented March 22
J
Josiah
Olean, NYMarch 22
I just don't buy it. The real problems we should focus on are the neglect and devaluing of many children--those who go to bed hungry and lack basic necessities. I can't get myself worked up over the spoiled children of the upper middle class.

Reply11 RecommendShareFlag
1 REPLY
Salix commented March 25
S
Salix
Sunset Park, BrooklynMarch 25
@Josiah
Well, those "spoiled children of the upper middle class" can grow up to be spoiled politicians of the Upper class. Then you might be worked up about it. After all, it did happen once.

Reply5 RecommendShareFlag
Mojo commented March 22
M
Mojo
Dearborn MiMarch 22
Can we stop pretending that the parents caught up in the cheating scandal were trying to "protect their kids from every challenge and shield them from any harm?" The only thing these parents were trying to do was ensure that they themselves would be able to brag that their kid got into Yale or some other prestigious school. It wasn't about helping their kids. If that was the case they would have been happy for their kids to go to less prestigious colleges. It's all about the pursuit of prestige and bragging rights. Nothing more.

Reply39 RecommendShareFlag
Caledonia commented March 22
C
Caledonia
MassachusettsMarch 22
I tried to model my parents' behavior of 'safety net,' yet it became more challenging with my ADHD eldest who was suicidal. The supports of the 504 plan weren't working, additional evaluations and school input resulted in an IEP. I became, and remain, the snowplow parent for the kid, now 19. 


Although there's something to be said for setting children up to learn to fail, the 'safety-net' parenting of yore also had a heavy dose of resignation to familial suicide and learning disabilities.

Reply13 RecommendShareFlag
1 REPLY
Mojo commented March 22
M
Mojo
Dearborn MiMarch 22
@Caledonia

As the mother of a 20-year-old son with ADHD, I totally agree with your comment. Of course, my son isn't suicidal, which complicates your situation exponentially. But he has struggled his entire life with schoolwork, often just giving up and deciding it was too hard to keep trying. If I had taken the advice of people who said I should just back off and let him fail, maybe he would have. Maybe he wouldn't have graduated from high school, and maybe he wouldn't now be at a community college, finally starting to figure out how to study and keep at it until he gets it right.

Advice such as this article offers does not take into account kids who start out with a deficit and need someone to push them until they're ready to push themselves. The kind of pushing these kids require has nothing to do with snowplows. I've been more like the tractor plowing the field but allowing him to plant the seeds and water and fertilize the crops himself. I know my kid. Without the plowing, those seeds would never have gotten planted as they have. And I wasn't willing to take that chance just to prove a point about self-reliance. "Learning to fail" is a great concept for kids who aren't familiar with failure. But for those who are faced with it every day, it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.

Reply22 RecommendShareFlag
Janice Badger Nelson commented March 22
Janice Badger Nelson
Janice Badger Nelson
Park City, UT from BostonMarch 22
Me to my dad circa 1975 (15 yo): Could I please have 2$ to go out with friends? 
Dad to me: Earn it. 
Me: (Eye roll) Starts vacuuming. 

Me with my daughter at her friend’s house circa 2016: 
My daughter’s friend to her mom: I need 20$
Her mom: Why?
Her: Mom!!!
Her mom: gets out wallet
My daughter to me: She didn’t have to do anything! Mom!!!....(Eye roll) 

I learned well from my dad. Our daughter is well adjusted  ( not perfect) and is a full-time college student but still earns her own money. We help her but she is grateful.

Reply13 RecommendShareFlag
Andrew commented March 22
A
Andrew
BrooklynMarch 22
The only way to learn is to fail slightly less often than you succeed. Sometimes more actually.

Reply5 RecommendShareFlag
AVT commented March 22
A
AVT
New YorkMarch 22
Recipes for disaster have many ingredients. But the common thread in this ugly brew is status seeking parents with lots of dollars and time on their hands. This scandal won’t change that.

Kids of affluence were better off in the days when parents had six or eight kids; family time was more rationed and children developed a greater sense of independence. It wasn’t by conscious choice, it just happened.

Reply8 RecommendShareFlag
MDM commented March 22
M
MDM
Akron, OHMarch 22
What really bugs me is these little delicate angels now seem to think they have some God given right to never be offended. Grow up.

Reply14 RecommendShareFlag
Friendlynotstupid commented March 22
Friendlynotstupid
Friendlynotstupid
West Hartford, CTMarch 22
Engaging with children to the degree suggested in the article seems like a bad idea. Obviously, empathizing and asking these questions is better than leaping in to solve the kid’s problem, but why are the parents owning the problem to begin with? Parents try to steer their kids through social and academic ups and downs and get way too involved, even when they do everything right. They give their kids a false idea that every problem can be solved with correct actions. That isn’t true! Parents sometimes need to say, “Well, that sucks.” The biggest messes I’ve seen as a middle school teacher for 35 years are caused by parents trying to prevent kids from feeling bad. Kids will feel bad when they have setbacks. If you act like these bad feelings are a tragedy and in need of remediation, kids start feeling worse. It’s hard to separate your emotional life from your child’s, but it’s probably they most vital gift you can give your kid.

Reply36 RecommendShareFlag
JCR commented March 22
J
JCR
AtlantaMarch 22
Sadly, we are in a winner-takes-all culture today, with the one percent gobbling up every penny and opportunity in sight. What's driving snowplow parents is the knowledge that colleges, corporations and country clubs do not want Joe Shmo, his degree from Podunk U, or his plans to lead an ethical, hardworking life. They want Weatherford Smith IX and his degree from Harvard and it does not matter if he has a lick of sense or qualifications because he has connections and money. Joe Shmo's fate is to become "labor" on the balance sheet, a cost that must be kept as low as possible in order to enrich the stockholders. It is terrifying to envision a future for one's child that is bereft of a decent wage, healthcare or pension plan. That's why the parents of America are panicking. Until colleges and employers choose regular, intelligent, low-key folks over uber-polished, tutored, and well-to-do folks with several key (unpaid) internships, nothing will change.

Reply37 RecommendShareFlag
2 REPLIES
historyRepeated commented March 24
H
historyRepeated
MassachusettsMarch 24
Believe me, employers pick intelligent, hard working employees. A company can’t be successful without them. Of course there are always the status newbie hires, but the game is relationships at that point.

For professional degrees, grad school counts more than undergrad. It’s more a meritocracy at that point than resume puffery getting into undergrad.

ReplyRecommendShareFlag
JCR commented March 26
J
JCR
AtlantaMarch 26
@historyRepeated Well, sorta! Here's one example of what I am talking about. Two young women graduate with journalism degrees. While looking for a position, one woman racks up work experience doing 2-3 years of unpaid internships. Dad foots the bill for rent, food, clothing so his daughter could get the experience and the "edge." Her competitor has to work like a dog, not doing magazine work, just to make expenses. Which woman will the company hire? Will the second woman be recognized for her hard work and standing on her own two feet? The answer, sadly, is no. The company will almost always choose the first woman, who has a truly unfair advantage.

Reply3 RecommendShareFlag
Jbugko commented March 22
Jbugko
Jbugko
Pittsburgh, paMarch 22
How to raise a self-sufficient child:

When it's time to clean up a mess, there should be no maid, no governess. no mother, and no father doing it - and the kid doesn't get to leave the house or use a cell-phone until the chore is done.  IF that child claims to be a prisoner, you say, no - you're just a member of a household and if you're not going to be a responsible one, you don't  get all the benefits that come with being a member.
No allowance unless it 's been earned.
Structure that deals with self-sufficiency and actual discovery, socializing, strategy, talent-nurturing, and positive growth -  instead of something for the parent to brag about at the water cooler.
And learn to give out compliemnts that encourage positive growth instead of narcissism. 

And no being with your siblings at the same table or sofa or bench outside without any interaction.  

Learn charades, board games, interacting and increasing your imaginative persuits and creativity with one another. Write a book, be a character in a book, write a play.  Play an instrument, play three.  Play five.  Play.  SPONTANEOUSLY!

Why are kids put on a rigid schedule and thrown into an SUV routinely, day in and day out.

They're supposed to be kids.

Put the phones down.

Reply24 RecommendShareFlag
Denver Doctor commented March 22
D
Denver Doctor
DenverMarch 22
Terrific article full of practical advise. Let’s hope it’s widely read!

Reply2 RecommendShareFlag
dee cee commented March 22
D
dee cee
lb caMarch 22
Autonomy,competence and relatedness...the three ingredients of happiness. Parents,take note!

Reply5 RecommendShareFlag
Joseph Morgan commented March 22
Joseph Morgan
Joseph Morgan
Sacramento CAMarch 22
Nice going Boeing.

“They’re critical, and cost almost nothing for the airlines to install,” said Bjorn Fehrm, an analyst at the aviation consultancy Leeham. “Boeing charges for them because it can. But they’re vital for safety.”

Please bring ethics back to your company.

Reply1 RecommendShareFlag
Marianne commented March 22
M
Marianne
Class M PlanetMarch 22
Can we introduce the concept of “safety-net” parenting? Be there to help mitigate serious damage so they can recover from their mistakes or life’s punches.

Reply8 RecommendShareFlag
D. DeMarco commented March 22
D
D. DeMarco
BaltimoreMarch 22
Make your teenage kids get a job and work for what they want, no matter how wealthy the family is.
This will give then a good foundation to a successful life, and make them much more aware that not everyone has the same advantages they might have.

A part time job during college is a good thing too.
This helps them to prioritize with both time and money.

Reply14 RecommendShareFlag
Catie commented March 21
C
Catie
New YorkMarch 21
When your husband and his ex are the snowplow and you are a steparent what do you do?  His daughter never goes to school on the day of an important test, instead stays home and works all day with a tutor.  Then, takes the test and gets an "A", my husband giving him a signed sick excuse.  I know she asks others about the test they took which to me is cheating.  When I say to my husband all the excuses all the extra help is not growing a responsible adult he tells me to look around everyone is doing it, extra time on tests, tutors etc.  In other words the world is tough and to compete you have to play the game.  I think the schools of NY also can play a role teaching ethics and strictly applying the rules.  The scholarship kids don't have a chance.  Your advice is good but the schools need not to help also.

Reply15 RecommendShareFlag
Rose commented March 21
R
Rose
SeattleMarch 21
Before getting all judgmental, please remember that some kids struggle with invisible neurological differences and require more hand-holding than their age-mates.

People aren't always going to disclose their kids' challenges to you, so it's worth bearing in mind that there may be more to the story than you know.

Reply36 RecommendShareFlag
VJO commented March 21
V
VJO
DCMarch 21
I don't know - the college admissions scandal is ridiculous to be sure, but as the mother of an unmotivated 13 year-old boy I really struggle with how involved to get 

I mean I could completely pull back and he could flunk 8th grade and get held back (maybe - he of course is above average in math and reading so he's not a good candidate to repeat 8th grade, but isn't that always the case with these boys *sigh*), but that doesn't seem like the right thing to do, when maybe he just needs to mature some.

But I generally agree that once they hit the teenage years you need to start to pull back because the most important lesson they need to learn is that choices have consequences and they have a lot of control over their future. Definitely feel that on a high level - but oh well off to remind the boy to turn in his homework, again

Reply10 RecommendShareFlag
4 REPLIES
A E M commented March 22
A
A E M
KentuckyMarch 22
@VJO As the mother of a formerly unmotivated 13 year old boy, I can tell you that what I had learned in 20 years of teaching is that motivation to do well in school (or in anything) has to come from within.  After he managed to flunk out of the prep school he was attending his junior year, I finally learned to take my own advice and back off.  He transferred to an alternative school, brought his grades up, but not enough to get into any "elite" college.  He started at the local community college (his choice since I told him he could choose among 1) full time job, 2) college of some sort or 3) finding all of his belongings in boxes on the sidewalk) and graduated magna cum laude  with an associates degree.  He followed this with graduation magna cum laude from a ranked university and now owns his own successful company.

Reply32 RecommendShareFlag
May Welborn commented March 22
M
May Welborn
South CarolinaMarch 22
@
Best response yet. Small setbacks early in life are learning opportunities where parents can give guidance not try to solve the problem

Reply3 RecommendShareFlag
Tom Burns commented March 24
T
Tom Burns
Wilbraham, MAMarch 24
I’m glad to see the Parent Effectiveness Training skills we learned in the 1970’s are still relevant. Active listening is still a worthwhile and helpful way to interact with most people including our children.

Reply1 RecommendShare